Titel: 17.12.2002
URL: 18:56:26
ELIZA--A Computer Program For the Study of
Natural Language Communication Between Man
and Machine
Aus: http://i5.nyu.edu/~mm64/x52.9265/january1966.html
Joseph Weizenbaum 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Electrical Engingeering
Cambridge, Mass. 
Commungicatins of the ACM Volume 9, Number 1 (January 1966): 36-35. 
Work reported herein was supported (in part) by Project MAC, an MIT research program sponsored by
the ARPA, Department of Defense, Contract Number Nonr-4102(01). 
Abstract
ELIZA is a program operating within the MAC time-sharing system at MIT which makes certain kinds of
natural language conversation between man and computer possible. Input sentences are analyzed on the
basis of decomposition rules which are triggered by key words appearing in the input text. Responses are
generated by reassembly rules associated with selected decomposition rules. The fundamental technical
problems with which ELIZA is concerned are: 
1. the identification of key words, 
2. the discovery of minimal context, 
3. the choice of appropriate transformations, 
4. generation of responses in the absence of keywords, and 
5. the provision of an ending capacity for ELIZA "scripts". 
A discussion of some psychological issues relevant to the ELIZA approach as well as of future
developments concludes the paper. 
Introduction
It is said that to explain is to explain away. This maxim is nowhere so well fulfilled as in the area of
computer programming, especially in what is called heuristic programming and artificial intelligence. For
in those realms machines are made to behave in wondrous ways, often sufficient to dazzle even the most
experienced observer. But once a particular program is unmasked, once its inner workings are explained
in language sufficiently plain to induice understanding, its magic crumbles away; it stands revealed as a
mere collection of procedures, each quite comprehensible. The observer says to himself "I could have
written that". With that thought he moves the program in question from the shelf marked "intelligent" to
that reserved for curios, fit to be discussed only with people less enlightened that he. 
The object of this paper is to cause just such a reevaluation of the program about to be "explained". Few
programs ever needed it more. 
Seite 1 von 6
Titel: 17.12.2002
URL: 18:56:26
ELIZA Program
ELIZA is a program which makes natural language conversation with a computer possible. Its present
implementation is on the MAC time-sharing system at MIT. It is written in MAD-SLIP [4] for the IBM
7094. Its name was chosen to emphasize that it may be incrementally improved by its users, since its
language abilities may be continually improved by a "teacher". Like the Eliza of Pygmalion fame, it can
be made to appear even more civilized, the relation of appearance to reality, however, remaining in the
domain of the playwright. 
For the present purpose it is sufficient to characterize the MAC system as one which permits an individual to
operate a full scale computer from a remotely located typewriter. The individual operator has the illusion that he is
the sole user of the computer complex, while in fact others may be "time-sharing" the system with him. What is
important here is that the computer can read messages typed on the typewriter and respond by writing on the
same instrument. The time between the computer's receipt of a message and the appearance of its response is a
function of the program controlling the dialog and of such MAC system parameters as the number of users
currently corresponding with the system. These latter parameters generally contribute so little to the overall
response time that conversational interaction with the computer need never involve truly intolerable delays. 
When in conversation with ELIZA, the user types in some statement or set of statements in natural language using
normal punctuation and sentence structures. Only the question mark may not be used, because it is interpreted as
a line delete character by the MAC system. The user's statement is terminated by a double carriage return which
serves to turn control over to ELIZA. ELIZA then analyzes the user's statement and generates some response
which it types out. Control is then again with the user. 
A typical conversation is the following: 
Men are all alike. 
IN WHAT WAY? 
They're always bugging us about something or other. 
CAN YOU THINK OF A SPECIFIC EXAMPLE? 
Well, my boyfriend made me come here. 
YOUR BOYFRIEND MADE YOU COME HERE 
He says I'm depressed much of the time. 
I AM SORRY TO HEAR YOU ARE DEPRESSED 
It's true. I am unhappy 
DO YOU THINK COMING HERE WILL HELP YOU NOT TO BE UNHAPPY 
I need some help, that much seems certain. 
Seite 2 von 6
Titel: 17.12.2002
URL: 18:56:26
WHAT WOULD IT MEAN TO YOU IF YOU GOT SOME HELP 
Perhaps I could learn to get along with my mother. 
TELL ME MORE ABOUT YOUR FAMILY 
My mother takes care of me. 
WHO ELSE IN YOUR FAMILY TAKES CARE OF YOU 
My father. 
YOUR FATHER 
You are like my father in some ways. 
WHAT RESEMBLANCE DO YOU SEE 
You are not very aggressive but I think you don't want me to notice that. 
WHAT MAKES YOU THINK I AM NOT VERY AGGRESSIVE 
You don't argue with me. 
WHY DO YOU THINK I DON'T ARGUE WITH YOU 
You are afraid of me. 
DOES IT PLEASE YOU TO BELIEVE I AM AFRAID OF YOU 
My father is afraid of everybody. 
WHAT ELSE COMES TO YOUR MIND WHEN YOU THINK OF YOUR FATHER 
Bullies. 
DOES THAT HAVE ANYTHING TO DO WITH THE FACT THAT YOUR BOYFRIEND MADE YOU
COME HERE 
The capitalized lines are the machine responses. 
The gross procedure of the program is quite simple; the input is read and inspected for the presence of a
keyword. When such a word is found, the sentence is transformed according to a rule associated with the
keyword, if not a content-free remark or, undercertain conditions, an earlier transformation is retrieved. The text
so computed or retrieved is then printed out. 
In detail, of course, the procedure sketched above is considerably more complex. Keywords, for example, may
have a RANK or precedence number. The procedure is sensitive to such numbers in that it will abandon a
Seite 3 von 6
Titel: 17.12.2002
URL: 18:56:26
keyword already found in the left-to-right scan of the text in favor of one having a higher rank. Also, the
procedure recognizes a comma or period as a delimiter. Whenever either one is encountered and a keyword has
already been found, all subsequent text is deleted from the input message. If no key has yet been found, the
phrase or sentence to the left of the delimiter (as well as the delimiter itself) is deleted. As a result, only single
phrases or sentences are ever transformed. 
Keywords and their associated transformation rules constitute the SCRIPT for a particular class of conversation.
[The word "transformation" is used in its generic sense rather than that given it by Harris and Chomsky in linguistic
contexts.] An important property of ELIZA is that a script is data; i.e., it is not part of the program itself. Hence,
ELIZA is not restricted to a particular set of recognition patterns or responses, indeed not even to any specific
language. ELIZA scripts exist (at this writing) in Welsh and German as well as in English. 
The fundamental technical problems with which ELIZA must be preoccupied are the following: 
1. The identification of the "most important" keyword occurring in the input message. 
2. The identification of some minimal context within which the chosen keyword appears; e.g., if the keyword
is "you", is it followed by the word "are" (in which case an assertion is probably being made). 
3. The choice of an appropriate transformation rule, and, of course, the making of the transformation itself. 
4. The provision of a mechanism that will permit ELIZA to respond "intelligently" when the input text
contained no keywords. 
5. The provision of machinery that facilitates editing, particularly extension, of the script on the script writing
level 
There are, of course, the usual constraints dictated by the need to be economical in the use of computer time and
storage space. 
The central issue is clearly one of text manipulation, and at the heart of that issue is the concept of the
transformation rule which has been said to be associated with certain keywords. The mechanisms subsumed
under the slogan "transformation rule" are a number of Slip functions which serve to (1) decompose a data string
according to certain criteria, hence to test the string as to whether it satisfies these criteria or not, and (2) to
reassemble a decomposed string according to certain assembly specifications. 
While this is not the place to discuss these functions in all their detail (or even to reveal their full power and
generality), it is important to the understanding of the operation of ELIZA to describe them in some detail. 
Consider the sentence "I am very unhappy these days". Suppose a foreigner with only a limited knowledge of
English but with a very good ear heard that sentence spoken but understood only the first two words "I am".
Wishing to appear interested, perhaps even sympathetic, he may reply "How long have you been very unhappy
these days?" What he must have done is to apply a kind of template to the original sentence, one part of which
matched the two words "I am" and the remainder isolated the words "very unhappy these days". He must also
have a reassembly kit specifically associated with that template, one that specifies that any sentence of the form "I
am BLAH" can be transformed to "How long have you been BLAH", independently of the meaning of BLAH. A
somewhat more complicated example is given by the sentence "It seems that you hate me". Here the foreigner
understands only the words "you" and "me"; i.e., he applies a template that decomposes the sentence into the four
parts 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
It seems that you hate me
Seite 4 von 6
Titel: 17.12.2002
URL: 18:56:26
of which only the second and fourth parts are understood. The reassembly rule might then be "What makes you
think I hate you"; i.e., it might throw away the first component, translate the two known words ("you" to "I" and
"me" to "you") and tack on a stock phrase (What makes you think) to the front of the reconstruction. A formal
notation in which to represent the decomposition template is 
(0 YOU 0 ME)
and the reassembly rule 
(WHAT MAKES YOU THINK I 3 YOU).
The "0" in the decomposition rule stands for "and indefinite number of words" (analogous to the indefinite dollar
sign of COMIT) [6
] while the "3" in the reassembly rule indicates that the third component of the subject
decomposition is to be inserted in its place. The decomposition rule 
(0 YOU 1 ME)
would have worked just as well in this specific example. A nonzero integer "n" appearing in a decomposition rule
indicates that the component in question should consist of exactly "n" words. However, of the two rules shown,
only the first would have matched the sentence. "It seems you love and hate me," the second failing because
there is more than one word between "you" and "me". 
In ELIZA the question of which decomposition rules to apply to an input text is of course a crucial one. The input
sentence might have been, for example, "It seems that you hate," in which case the decomposition rule (0 YOU 0
ME) would have failed in that the word "ME" would not have been found at all, let alone in its assigned place.
Some other decomposition rule would then have to be tried and, failing that, still another until a match could be
made or a total failure reported. ELIZA must therefore have a mechanism to sharply limit the set of
decomposition rules which are potentially applicable to a currently active input sentence. This is the keyword
mechanism. 
An input sentence is scanned from left to right. Each word is looked up in a dictionary of keywords. If a word is
identified as a keyword, then (apart from the issue of precedence of keywords) ony decomposition rules
containing that keyword need to be tried. The trial sequence can even be partially ordered. For example, the
decomposition rule (0 YOU 0) associated with the keyword "YOU" (and decomposing the sentence into 
1. all the words in front of "YOU", 
2. the word "YOU", and 
3. all the words following "YOU") 
should be the last one tried since it is bound to succeed. 
Two problems now arise. One stems from the fact that almost none of the words in any given sentence are
represented in the keyword dictionary. The other is that of "associating" both decomposition and reassembly rules
with keywords. The first is serious in that the determination that a word is not in a dictionary may well require
more computation (i.e., time) than the location of a word which is represented. The attack on both problems
begins by placing both a keyword and its associated rules on a list. The basic format of a typical key list is the
following: 
(K ((D1) (R1,1) (R1,2) ··· (R1,m1))
Seite 5 von 6
Titel: 17.12.2002
URL: 18:56:26
    ((D2) (R2,1) (R2,2) ··· (R2,m2))
      .                     .    
      .                     .    
      .                     .    
    ((Dn) (Rn,1) (Rn,2) ··· (Rn,mn)))
where K is the keyword, Di the ith decomposition rule associated with K and Ri,j the jth reassembly rule
associated with the ith decomposition rule. 
A common pictorial representation of such a structure is the tree diagram shown in Figure 1. The top level of this
structure contains the keyword followed by the names of lists; each one of which is again a list structure beginning
with a decomposition rule and followed by reassembly rules. Since list structures of this type have no
predetermined dimensionality limitations, any number of decomposition rules may be associated with a given
keyword and any number of reassembly rules with any specific decomposition rule. SLIP is rich in functions that
sequence over structures of this type efficiently. Hence programming problems are minimized. 
An ELIZA script consists mainly of a set of list structures of the type shown. The actual keyword directory is
constructed when such a script is read into the hitherto empty program. The basic structural component of the
keyword directory is a vector KEY of (currently) 128 contiguous computer words. As a particular key list
structure is read the keyword K at its top is randomized (hashed) by a procedure that produces (currently) a 7-
bit integer "i". The word "always", for example, yields the integer 14. KEY(i), i.e., the ith word of the vector
KEY, is then examined to determine whether it contains a list name. If it does not, then an empty list is created, its
name placed in KEY(i), and the key list structure in question is placed on that list. 
Discussion
At this writing, the only serious ELIZA scripts which exist are some which cause ELIZA to respond roughly as
would certain psychotherapists (Rogerians). ELIZA performs best when its human correspondent is initially
instructed to "talk" to it, via the typewriter of course, just as one would to a psychiatrist. This mode of
conversation was chosen because the psychiatric interview is one of the few examples of categorized dyadic
natural language communication in which one of the participating pair is free to assume the pose of knowing
almost nothing of the real world. If, for example, one were to tell a psychiatrist "I went for a long boat ride" and
he responded "Tell me about boats", one would not assume that he knew nothing about boats, but that he had
some purpose in so directing the subsequent conversation. It is important to note that this assumption is one made
by the speaker. Whether it is realistic or not is an altogether separate question. In any case, it has a crucial
psychological utility in that it serves the speaker to maintain his sense of being heard and understood. The speaker
furher defends his impression (which even in real life may be illusory) by attributing to his conversational partner
all sorts of background knowledge, insights and reasoning ability. But again, these are the speaker's contribution
to the conversation. 
References
1. Weizenbaum, J. Symmetric list processor. Comm. ACM 6, (Sept. 1963), 524-544. 
2. Yngve, J.COMIT Programming Manual. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1961
APPENDIX. An Eliza Script
Seite 6 von 6